---
layout: post
title: Post Template
tags: default
---
Yes, Learning How to Program is Like Rocket Science

Not long ago a friend of mine forwarded an article to me. The article had an intriguing title of ‘Why Learning to Code is So Damn Hard’. It was a blog post by Erik Trautman, the Founder of the Viking Code School and creator of the Odin Project. The basic argument in the article is that learning to code is not a very easy endeavor and generally goes through four stages as shown below:

My friend lamented that he seems to be stuck in Phase II of the journey to becoming a software engineer(the cliff of confusion).
So why is learning how to program sometimes very frustrating? This is despite the fact that there are numerous success stories that might suggest the exact opposite. Take this case of a lady who switched from a career in education to software engineering in four months (4 months!). Another example is someone who began as a paralegal, then moved to communications and now has fully transitioned into a Front-End Engineer. Is it that some skills come easily to some people as compared to others?
A little Google search for programming boot-camps will yield a long list of institutions that exist in almost every major city in the world that proclaim to make you become a proficient software engineer within 3~6 months. Quincy Larson has done a fantastic job of teaching programming to thousands of people across the globe through his non-profit organization freeCodeCamp using the JavaScript programming language. Such institutions have strove to demystify the art of programming and make the skills available to whoever is willing to learn. However, some companies are still hesitant in hiring coding boot-camp graduates as they are believed to be less knowledgeable in computer science fundamental concepts such as data structures and algorithms, which are much harder to master as compared to whipping up a Note-taking app using a JavaScript Library like React.
Some people claim that one doesn’t actually need to know much of the CS fundamentals in order to thrive as a programmer. That in the real software industry they won’t require the knowledge of the fundamentals that much. For example, should a Front-End Engineer care to know about space and time complexities and the Big O? Should they bother to study about pointers and how memory is allocated; how to avoid data races and buffer overflows? Niklaus Wirth, the celebrated Swiss Computer Scientist and creator of the Pascal programming language wrote a book in 1975 entitled: Algorithms + Data Structures = Programs. From this title, it would appear that no one can claim to fully understand the art (and science) of programming if they are not well versed with the building blocks of a program (i.e. algorithms and data structures).
In his critically acclaimed book ‘Outliers’, author Malcolm Gladwell, explains that it takes approximately 10,000 hours of practice for one to become an expert in any field that they choose to indulge in. Peter Norvig, the Director of research at Google and co-author of ‘Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach’, seems to agree with Gladwell. In his famous article titled: Teach Yourself Programming in Ten Years, he wonders why so many people are in such a rush to learn how to program. He disputes the idea behind books that claim to ‘Teach Yourself {a certain language} in 24 hours or 21 days’. He also adds that one should learn at least a half dozen programming languages in order for them to qualify as a ‘programmer’.
So why is learning how to code so damn hard? Well, like rocket science, it is a highly scientific and abstract field. It requires relatively high levels of cognitive abilities and logical (computational) thinking. It is no wonder that most of the pioneers of computer science had backgrounds in either pure computer science (James Gosling, Bjarne Stroustrup, Linus Torvalds) or Mathematics/Physics/Electrical Engineering (Ken Thompson, Dennis Ritchie, Andrew Tanenbaum, Guido van Rossum). These fields of study are known to foster abstract thinking abilities. They also require a rigorous amount of academic discipline in order to succeed in them. The only exception to this trend is Larry Wall, the creator of PERL, who had a background in Linguistics (Although I consider Perl to be a ‘chaotic’ language). The process of learning how to program is essentially a process of learning how to THINK in abstract ways and to use logical methods in solving complex problems by breaking them into smaller discrete units.
It seems that the question now should be: Can anyone learn how to think computationally? And can they do that without having a background in one of the fields mentioned above? I recently taught a course called ‘INTRODUCTION TO COMPUTATION’ , where students are introduced to the realm of computational thinking using the Python programming language (which many consider to be an easy language to be used as an introductory programming language). What I realized at the end of the course is that the students who thrived are the ones who had strong grades in Maths and the Sciences from High School, while the others seemed to struggle with some of the concepts. I know some would argue that this was a small sample case study that can not be used as a general rule. But it still gave a useful insight.
My own experience also seems to suggest that indeed learning how to program is not such an easy task. My background is in Electrical and Electronics Engineering. I came into contact with programming in the second semester of my freshman year in college. The course was aptly called ‘Introduction to Programming’ which was taught using the C programming language. Learning C for the first time was so frustrating that I recall suggesting to the instructor that we should have used Pascal instead. I ended up managing only a B in the course. Although I have gone on to learn other languages since then, I have never quite become ‘comfortable’ in C, after all those years. As a result I am usually very cautious when answering the question, ‘How good are you in programming language X, Y or Z’? The best example I like using is when someone asks me how good I am in C++. The answer I am fond of giving is that so far I am done with the ‘C’ and the first ‘+’, and that I am still struggling with the second ‘+’. Concepts like operator overloading, multiple inheritance and generic programming using the C++ Standard Template Library (STL) can be a little mind-bending to a programming novice. Arguably, C++ is the most complicated programming language that it has actually been nicknamed the ‘beast’. It was because of this that Java overtook C++ to become the most widely used programming language in the world. The creators of the Go and Rust programming languages have stated that part of their motivations for creating these languages was the complexity inherent in C++ (Although beginning from C++11, the language has seen some significant improvements). If you ever come across anyone who claims to be an ‘expert’ in C++ (apart from Bjarne Stroustrup and Alex Stepanov), you should question their integrity.
So, yes learning how to program is like rocket science, and it requires a mind that is adept at abstract thinking. It also applies (or should apply) the rigorous engineering methodologies common in other traditional engineering disciplines. For an interesting perspective about whether programmers should call themselves engineers or not, you may read this piece from The Atlantic.